---
title: Cappuccino 0.9.6
date: '2013-01-20'
author: Alexander Ljungberg
tags:
- cappuccino
- update
- objective-j
- releases
---

Cappuccino 0.9.6 is a stable build of Cappuccino for those of you not yet ready to update to Objective-J 2.0.

##### Should I get Cappuccino 0.9.6?

Are any of the following true?

* I need a stable build.
* I am currently using Cappuccino 0.9.5, 0.9.6-RC1 or 0.9.6-RC2.
* I need a starter pack.

Then the answer is **YES**, you should [get Cappuccino 0.9.6](#getit).

---

Are any of the following true?

* I need Aristo 2.
* I want to try Objective-J 2.0.

Then the answer is **NO**, you should instead [build from source](/learn/build-source.html).

---

### Cappuccino 0.9.6 <a name="getit">&nbsp;</a>

Cappuccino 0.9.6 is the latest stable build of Cappuccino and it features literally hundreds of new features and bug fixes. This release builds on the many improvements and new features of our preview releases, RC1 and RC2.

Cappuccino 0.9.6 is built **without** Aristo 2 and Objective-J 2. It will be the last build of Cappuccino featuring **only Aristo 1 and using the Objective-J 1.0 compiler**. It is meant to serve as a stable and reliable release.

Here is just a tiny sampling of highlights from Cappuccino 0.9.6:

* CPComboBox.
* Resize windows from any edge.
* Automatic column sort support for bindings and array controller based table views, without having to manually set up sort descriptors.
* CPTokenField autocomplete improvements.
* CG clipping with a bezier path and a number of other drawing improvements.
* Doc modal sheets and generally improved sheet support.
* Support for many more CPButton types and options.

There are so many more new things and features in Cappuccino that we couldn't even begin to fit them all in a blog post. Instead, please refer to the Cappuccino [release notes](/cappuccino-release-notes.html).

_- The Cappuccino Core Developer Team_

[Download Cappuccino](/downloads.html)

[Full Release Notes](/cappuccino-release-notes.html)
